
Introduction
Many plant species exhibit ploidy variation (Levin, 2002; Soltis et al., 2007; Rice et al.,
2015), and many of these mixed-ploidy species have populations in which different cytotypes coexist or form contact zones (Kolář et al., 2017). How such mixed-ploidy populations emerge and are maintained has proven somewhat challenging to understand.
Consider for instance a randomly mating diploid population. Under the commonly
accepted view that new polyploid plants are mostly formed through the union of unreduced gametes (Bretagnolle and Thompson, 1995; Herben et al., 2016; Kreiner et al.,
2017b), a new tetraploid individual originating by a chance encounter of two unreduced
diploid gametes (an event occurring at an appreciable rate; Kreiner et al. (2017a)) is
highly unlikely to establish a stable tetraploid subpopulation, as most of its gametes will
end up in unfit hybrids of odd ploidy level (a phenomenon referred to as ‘triploid block’,
see Ramsey and Schemske (1998); Köhler et al. (2010); Brown et al. (2024)). This negative frequency dependence effect is commonly referred to as minority cytotype exclusion
(MCE), after Levin (1975). It is well-appreciated that, as a consequence of MCE, the
rate of unreduced gamete formation needs to be extraordinarily high for tetraploids to
establish in a large random mating initially diploid population (Felber and Bever (1997),
see also section S2.1).
Hence, to explain the widespread occurrence of mixed-ploidy populations, additional
factors besides the continuous formation of polyploids through the union of unreduced
gametes need to be considered. Firstly, chance establishment of tetraploids through drift
could occur. Indeed, the problem is somewhat analogous to the spread of underdominant chromosomal rearrangements, where local establishment through genetic drift and
subsequent spreading in a subdivided population through local extinction and recolonization dynamics has been suggested as a plausible model (Lande, 1985). However, MCE
is quite strong in randomly mating mixed-ploidy populations, and the population size
has to be very small for local tetraploid establishment to occur at an appreciable rate
(Rausch and Morgan (2005), see also section S2.2). Secondly, any form of prezygotic
isolation between cytotypes could promote establishment of polyploid cytotypes by alleviating MCE. Particularly relevant are assortative mating by cytotype (for instance
through phenological differences across cytotypes, or differences in pollinators; Kolář
et al. (2017)), self-fertilization (Rausch and Morgan, 2005; Novikova et al., 2023), and
localized dispersal (Baack, 2005; Kolář et al., 2017). Finally, selection may be invoked
to explain the establishment of polyploids. Tetraploids may have higher relative fitness
than their diploid counterparts due to reduced inbreeding depression (Ronfort, 1999), or
due to being better adapted to (changing) environmental conditions (Van de Peer et al.,
2021).
None of these factors is likely to explain by itself the establishment of polyploids, and
the consensus in the field appears to be that some mix of the above is required to explain
the occurrence of mixed-ploidy populations in nature (Kolář et al., 2017; Mortier et al.,
2024). In particular, polyploids are thought to establish mainly in novel, unoccupied
habitats where they evade MCE (for instance at range edges, or after local extinction
due to environmental change) (Griswold, 2021). However, such peripheral habitats are
likely to present adaptive challenges to establishment (Kawecki, 2008), and if polyploids
are able to colonize such habitats at an appreciable rate, they must somehow be better
adapted to local conditions, or more able to adapt to those conditions despite inbreeding
and maladaptive migration, compared to diploids. Indeed, when the source population
is dominated by diploids, the probability that a migrant individual is tetraploid will be
very small (O(u2 ) if u is the probability that a diploid in the source population produces
an unreduced gamete in meiosis), so that tetraploids need a substantial advantage during
colonization if they are to establish before diploids do.
While there have been substantial modeling efforts aimed at understanding autotetraploid establishment within diploid populations (Levin, 1975; Felber, 1991; Felber and
Bever, 1997; Rausch and Morgan, 2005; Oswald and Nuismer, 2011; Clo et al., 2022), the
problem of polyploid establishment in peripheral habitats remains largely unaddressed
(but see Griswold (2021)), despite its centrality to verbal arguments about the establishment of polyploids in natural populations (Kolář et al., 2017; Van de Peer et al., 2021;
Clo, 2022b).
Here we develop a rather general model for the establishment of a mixed-ploidy population in a novel, unoccupied habitat based on Barton and Etheridge (2018). In order to
establish in the novel habitat, the population has to adapt to local environmental conditions. We assume fitness is determined by directional selection on a single polygenic trait
which can be interpreted as log fitness at low density in the new habitat. As in Barton
and Etheridge (2018), we assume the trait follows the infinitesimal model (sensu Barton
et al. (2017), i.e. the ‘Gaussian descendants’ infinitesimal model (Turelli, 2017)). We
extend the infinitesimal model, and the approach for exact simulation of trait evolution
under the infinitesimal model, to mixed-ploidy populations. This is a first contribution
of the present paper. We then use simulations to study tetraploid establishment, both
2

from single migrants and under continuous migration from a predominantly diploid source
population, examining the effects of autopolyploid genetics, maladaptive migration, selfing and assortative mating on the probability that autotetraploids establish in the novel
habitat.

Model and Methods
Mixed-ploidy population model
We consider a mixed-ploidy population of size N consisting of N2 diploid, N3 triploid
and N4 = N − N2 − N3 tetraploid individuals. We assume an individual of ploidy level k
forms haploid and diploid gametes with proportions uk1 and uk2 , as well as a proportion
1 − uk1 − uk2 inviable (e.g. aneuploid or polyploid) gametes. The (relative) fecundity of
a k-ploid individual is hence uk1 + uk2 . Unless stated otherwise, we will assume
where u is referred to as the proportion of unreduced gametes, and 2v is the proportion
of euploid gametes produced by a triploid individual.
3

When two individuals mate, we assume they produce gametes according to their ploidy
level (eq. (1)), which randomly combine to produce offspring (which may be inviable if one
of the contributing gametes is inviable). Intrinsic fitness disadvantages associated with
particular zygotic ploidy levels or cross types (e.g. modeling phenomena such as ‘triploid
block’) can be straighforwardly included at this level. An analysis of a deterministic model
(i.e. where N → ∞) for the cytotype dynamics and equilibrium cytotype composition
under random mating is included in section S2.1 (see also Felber and Bever (1997);
Kauai et al. (2024)). The stochastic version for finite and constant N is analyzed briefly
in section S2.2.

Infinitesimal model
The basic infinitesimal model. Consider a population which expresses a quantitative
trait determined by a large number of additive loci of small effect. The infinitesimal model
approximates the inheritance of such a trait by assuming that the trait value Zij of a
random offspring from parents with trait values zi and zj follows a Gaussian distribution
with mean equal to the midparent value and variance which is independent of the mean:
Here, Vij is referred to as the segregation variance in family (i, j). This is the variation
generated among offspring from the same parental pair due to random Mendelian segregation in meiosis. This approximation can be justified as arising from the limit where
the number of loci determining the trait tends to infinity (Barton et al., 2017).
An alternative, and for our purposes useful, way to characterize the model is to write
Zij = Yi +Yj , where Yi and Yj are independent Gaussian random variables Yi ∼ N z2i , Vi
(and similarly for Yj ). We refer to Yi as the (random) gametic value of individual i, and
to Vi as the gametic segregation variance of individual i. This formulation is helpful in
that it highlights that Mendelian segregation occurs independently in both parents when
gametes are produced, which then combine additively to determine the offspring trait
value. This model applies readily to an autopolyploid population expressing a trait with
infinitesimal genetics. For instance, when an autotetraploid produces a diploid gamete,
it will pass on half its trait value to the gamete on average, with a variance determined
by the details of tetraploid meiosis (which are not, in general, identical to those of diploid
meiosis, see below).
In a finite population, the segregation variance will decay over time as the population
becomes more inbred. Indeed, Mendelian segregation generates less variation among the
gametes produced by individual i when that individual is more inbred, as segregation at
homozygous loci does not generate any variation. When Fi is the inbreeding coefficient
relative to some ancestral reference population with gametic segregation variance V (i.e.
the probability that two genes at a locus in individual i sampled without replacement
are identical by descent), the gametic segregation variance of individual i will be Vi =
(1 − Fi )V . This holds for both diploids and tetraploids (section S2.5.1, also Moody et al.
(1993)).
Scaling of traits across ploidy levels. If we would somewhat naively assume that the
allelic effects underlying an additive quantitative trait are identical across ploidy levels,
a tetraploid offspring from a cross between two diploids would yield, on average, a trait
4

value which is the sum of the parental trait values, with a distribution that depends on
the variance generated by the process producing unreduced gametes. This is not likely
to reflect biological reality: tetraploids do not tend to have, for instance, twice the size of
their diploid progenitors on average. Similarly, the genetic variance at Hardy-Weinberg
and linkage equilibrium (HWLE) in a large non-inbred tetraploid population will be twice
that of their diploid counterparts under such assumptions, which is similarly unrealistic
(Clo, 2022a).
In order to account for this, we introduce a scaling factor βk , accounting for the effects
of polyploidization per se on trait expression in k-ploids. To introduce and interpret this
parameter, we consider an L-locus additive model, with two alleles (0 and 1) at each
locus. For a k-ploid individual, let Xi,j be the allele at homolog j of locus i. We assume
the trait value is determined by
Where ai,k is the allelic effect of the 1 allele at locus i in k-ploids. The genetic variance
at HWLE in k-ploids (Ṽz,k ) will then be
where we refer to Vk as the variance associated with a haploid genome in k-ploids at
HWLE. If we now assume ai,k = βk ai,2 , i.e. allelic effects in k-ploids are as in diploids,
but scaled by a factor βk , and assume equal allele frequencies in the different cytotypes,
we find that
Note that by definition β2 = 1. Under the infinitesimal model (where ai,2 → 0 as L → ∞),
we have Ṽz,2 = 2V2 = 2V (Barton et al., 2017), where V is the segregation variance in
the diploid population. Hence, in the infinitesimal limit we have Vk = βk2 V2 = βk2 V .
Mixed-ploidy infinitesimal model. We can extend the infinitesimal model to the
mixed-ploidy case, assuming that the gametic value, on the diploid trait scale, associated
with a k-ploid gamete (k ∈ {1, 2}) from individual i of ploidy level ci ∈ {2, 3, 4} is a
Gaussian random variable Yi,k with distribution
where Vi,k is the gametic segregation variance associated with the production of a k-ploid
gamete by individual i (see below). The trait value of an individual originating from the
union of a k-ploid gamete of individual i and an l-ploid gamete from individual j is then
Zijkl = βk+l (Yi,k + Yj,l )
i.e., Zijkl is a Gaussian random variate with distribution
Table 2: Gametic segregation variance for haploid and diploid gametes produced by the three cytotypes
in the mixed-ploidy model. Fi is the inbreeding coefficient of individual i (producing the gamete), whereas
αk is the probability that a diploid gamete from a k-ploid individual receives two copies of the same
parental gene. We assume α3 ≤ 1/4 and α4 ≤ 1/6 (see section S2.6).

cytotype
diploid
triploid
tetraploid

For the production of diploid gametes by a k-ploid individual, the segregation variance
depends not only on the segregation variance in the base population (V ) and the inbreeding coefficient (F ), but also on the detailed assumptions on how these aberrant meiotic
processes occur. Importantly however, these details only affect the gametic segregation
variance through the quantity αk , which is the probability that a k-ploid transmits two
copies of the same homolog to a diploid gamete. Note that α4 , the probability that a
diploid gamete of a tetraploid individual carries two copies of the same homolog, is the
probability of double reduction (e.g. Lynch and Walsh (1998) p.57), and is upper bounded
by 1/6 (Stift et al., 2008). The value of α2 depends on the relative frequency of unreduced
gamete formation through so-called first and second division restitution (Bretagnolle and
Thompson, 1995; De Storme and Geelen, 2013). We summarize the expressions for the
gametic segregation variance in table 2. Detailed derivations can be found in section S2.6.
Writing z̄2 for the mean trait value in the diploid subpopulation, eq. (7) implies that
a tetraploid offspring from a random diploid parental pair has an expected trait value
equal to z̄4 = 2β4 z̄2 . This hence implies that |z̄4 | ≥ |z̄2 |, with equality only when β4 = 1/2
or z̄2 = z̄4 = 0. In other words, when β4 > 1/2, we would have for all but z̄2 = 0 that
newly formed tetraploids have more extreme phenotypes on average than their diploid
parents. In our establishment model (see below), we shall therefore always consider the
case where z̄2 = 0 in the source population, and think of the trait value modeled as the
deviation from the mean phenotype in the source population.
The property that polyploid phenotypes are more extreme on average makes sense if
we consider the underlying genetic model: if we assume the source population is at an
equilibrium between mutation, drift and stabilizing selection, segregating genetic variants
that affect the trait will be equally likely to have positive or negative allelic effects (Hayward and Sella, 2022). At equilibrium, any diploid individual with trait value z − z̄2 > 0
then carries an excess of variants with positive allelic effects on the trait, and this excess
should be exaggerated in its polyploid offspring, which carry twice the excess of their
parent on average, unless allelic effects are scaled exactly by one half (i.e. β4 = 1/2).
In other words, the mixed-ploidy model is not ‘coordinate free’ as the basic infinitesimal
model is: eq. (7) only makes sense when the trait values that are modeled correspond to
deviations from the mean values associated with an underlying equilibrium state.
Recursions for inbreeding coefficients We can simulate the mixed-ploidy infinitesimal model for a finite population through a straightforward extension of the approach
outlined in Barton et al. (2017), provided we can efficiently track inbreeding and coancestry coefficients across the different ploidy levels. Denoting the parents of individual i by

6

k and l, the recursion for the inbreeding coefficients in the mixed-ploidy case becomes

where the sums are over individuals in the parental population, and where Pik ∈ {0, 31 , 12 , 23 , 1}
is the probability that a gene copy in i is derived from parent k.

Establishment model
Our model for the establishment of a population in an initially unoccupied habitat is
based on Barton and Etheridge (2018). We assume a large non-inbred ‘mainland’ mixedploidy population at HWLE and cytotype equilibrium, with E[z] = 0 irrespective of
the cytotype. The equilibrium trait value distribution for the different cytotypes on the
mainland is complicated in general, but a very accurate approximation (which we use
throughout) is readily obtained for the case where u is small (see section S2.7).
In generation t, M (t) migrant individuals arrive on an island (the new habitat) joining
∗
N (t) resident individuals, where M (t) is Poisson distributed with mean m. The migrant
individuals are assumed to be unrelated to the resident individuals. After migration in
generation t, the N (t) = N ∗ (t) + M (t) individuals reproduce sexually, and the offspring
thus produced survives until the next generation with a probability determined by their
trait value. In the basic model, random selfing is allowed (but see below for a model
with self-incompatibility). We assume the trait is under directional selection, with fitness
w(z) = eγ(z−θ) , where γ is the intensity of directional selection and θ is the trait value
for which the growth rate of the population becomes positive. Throughout the paper, we
define establishment as reaching a population of size 100.
Again following Barton and Etheridge (2018), we simulate the model by first calculating the fitness of each parental pair (i, j), which is the expected fitness of offspring of
this pair

The expectation on the right hand side can be calculated from eq. (7) using the momentgenerating function of the Gaussian. Having calculated the wij , thePnumber of offspring
surviving into the next generation is calculated as N ∗ (t + 1) =
i,j wij /N (t). Next,
N ∗ (t + 1) offspring individuals are sampled by sampling parental pairs and gametes
kl
proportional to wij
, and sampling a trait value in accordance with eq. (7).
7

Self-fertilization and assortative mating
We model partial self-fertilization by assuming that a proportion σci of the ovules of
individual i with ploidy level ci are fertilized by self-pollen, while the remaining proportion 1 − σci are fertilized by randomly sampled pollen (which may be self-pollen with
probability 1/N ). That is, the expected number of offspring from individual i as mother
surviving after selection is
#
We hence assume no pollen limitation (all outcrossing ovules are fertilized), and no pollen
discounting (the probability of being a father is unaffected by an individual’s selfing rate).
When modeling self-incompatibility, we assume there is no intrinsic disadvantage to selfincompatibility, except when there is only a single individual in the population, i.e.
We model assortative mating by ploidy level in a similar way, assuming that a fraction
ρci of the ovules of individual i are fertilized by pollen sampled from the ci -ploid portion
of the population, while a fraction 1 − ρci is fertilized by pollen randomly sampled from
the entire population.
Implementation and availability
Individual-based simulations for the mixed-ploidy infinitesimal model were implemented
in Julia (Bezanson et al., 2017). Documented code and simulation notebooks are available
at https://github.com/arzwa/InfGenetics.

Results
The results section is organized as follows: first we verify the correctness and accuracy of
the infinitesimal model for mixed-ploidy populations by comparison against simulations of
a model with finitely many loci. Next we assess how autotetraploid genetics and different
assumptions on the genetic variance of neotetraploids affect the probability of tetraploid
establishment in a marginal habitat relative to diploid establishment, starting from a
single maladapted migrant individual. We then study how continuous migration from a
predominantly diploid maladapted source population affects the relative establishment
probability, assessing the impact of migration load and MCE. Finally, we consider the
impact of prezygotic isolation mechanisms
establishment in the marginal
p on tetraploid
p
habitat. Throughout, we assume β3 = 2/3, β4 = 1/2 and α2 = α3 = α4 = 0, unless
stated otherwise.

8

Figure 1: The infinitesimal model in autotetraploids. Comparisons are shown for the decay of the
genetic variance (Vz ) due to inbreeding in exact simulations of the infinitesimal model in autotetraploids
against individual-based simulations of autotetraploid populations with L unlinked additive loci determining the quantitative trait. (A) Simulations of a model without double reduction (α4 = 0). (B)
Simulations of a model with maximal double reduction (α4 = 1/6) (for all loci in the finite L simulations). We show window-smoothed values for visual clarity, with observed genetic variances averaged in
windows of 20 generations every 10 generations. The black line marks e−t/4N . We assume N = 250 and
Vz (0) = 1.

Autotetraploid and mixed-ploidy infinitesimal model
We evaluate the accuracy of the autotetraploid infinitesimal model as an approximation
to the evolution of a quantitative trait determined by L additive loci. We find that the
infinitesimal model with inbreeding generally yields accurate predictions for the evolution
of the genetic variance when the number of loci is sufficiently large (L ≥ 100, say, figs. 1
and S1). Furthermore, we confirm that, in the absence of double reduction, the decay in
genetic variance due to inbreeding after a time t is well-predicted by e−t/4N (fig. 1A), as
expected from the results of Arnold et al. (2012). As predicted, double reduction leads to
an immediate increase in genetic variance (as it increases the segregation variance), but
leads to accelerated inbreeding, causing faster loss of genetic variance in the long-term
(figs. 1 and S1). As noted by Arnold et al. (2012), the loss of genetic variation in the
presence of double reduction cannot, however, be described by a single long-term effective
population size.
Simulations for the mixed-ploidy model further confirm the correctness of our infinitesimal approximation (fig. S2), yielding accurate predictions for the evolution of the
phenotypic variance across ploidy levels and for different assumptions regarding the scaling of allelic effects (β parameters) and unreduced gamete formation (α parameters).
It is worth noting that, although inbreeding is slower in autotetraploids than in
diploids for the same population size, the tetraploid fraction of a diploid-dominated
mixed-ploidy population will have an equal or higher average inbreeding coefficient (fig. S3).
This is because in such a population, triploid and tetraploid individuals mostly arise from
gametes formed by diploid individuals, or by polyploid individuals with very recent diploid
ancestry (on average 1 + u + 2v generations ago for tetraploids, and 1 + 32 (u + 2v) generations ago for triploids, see section S2.3). As a result, the polyploid subpopulations will
show an average relatedness similar to that of the diploid population and not evolve as an
isolated higher-ploidy population would. A nonzero probability of producing IBD diploid
gametes (αk > 0) will then further increase the inbreeding coefficient in the tetraploid and
triploid fraction of the population relative to their diploid progenitors (fig. S3). Therefore, as long as diploids dominate, harboring some fraction of the gene pool in polyploid
9

Figure 2: (A) Probability of establishment from a single diploid or tetraploid individual with trait
value z = 0 for increasing selection intensity γ. We assume m = 0 and u = 0, i.e. there is no migration,
and no unreduced gametes are produced.
The trait is scaled in tetraploids so as to yield the same
p
genetic variance at HWLE (β4 = 1/2) (B) Probability of a tetraploid individual with trait value z = 0
successfully founding a population (P4 ), relative to the probability
for a diploid individual with the
p
same trait value (P2 ). The vertical dashed line marks β4 = 1/2, for which the variance at HWLE is
identical between diploids and autotetraploids. (C) Probability of tetraploid establishment relative to
the probability of diploid establishment
(on a log10 scale) across a range of values for γ and β4 . The
p
vertical line again marks β4 = 1/2. All results are estimated from 500.000 replicate simulations and
assume θ = 2. Establishment is defined as reaching N = 100.

individuals has a negligible effect on the rate of inbreeding in the mixed-ploidy population
as a whole, and we find that the evolution of the inbreeding coefficient over time is well
predicted by 1 − e−t/2Ne , where the inbreeding-effective population size is, to first order
in u, given by (1 − 2u)N (section S2.4). This is just the expected number of diploid individuals (to first order in u), highlighting that when diploids dominate, polyploids have
low fitness and do not contribute to the effective population size.

Establishment from a single individual
Having established the validity of the mixed-ploidy infinitesimal model, we now use it
to study the establishment of polyploids in a marginal habitat to which migrants from a
mixed-ploidy source population are maladapted.
We first consider the establishment of a population from a single migrant individual
with trait value z0 = 0. We assume u = 0 (i.e. there are no unreduced gametes, and
hence no newly formed polyploids) and compare the probability of establishment when the
migrant is diploid vs. tetraploid (fig. 2). As noted by Barton and Etheridge (2018), the
establishment√
probability √
(for a given cytotype) depends essentially on two dimensionless
parameters, γ 2V and θ/ 2V , corresponding to the intensity of selection and the degree
of maladaptation, respectively. We shall scale our results accordingly, assuming 2V = 1
throughout, and shall assume θ = 2, so that the average trait value has to increase by
two standard deviations to achieve a positive growth rate. The relative establishment
probability for different cytotypes will of course also depend on how allelic effects scale
across ploidy levels (β).
We find that reduced inbreeding in tetraploids substantially increases the establishment probability of tetraploids relative to diploids across a large part of the parameter
space (fig. 2). Indeed, in the case where allelic effects
p are scaled across ploidy levels to
yield the same equilibrium genetic variance (β4 = 1/2, so that polyploid migrants are
not more likely to have high fitness than diploid migrants), the establishment probability
for tetraploids can be almost five times as high as in diploids depending on the selection
gradient (fig. 2A). As the segregation variance and initial trait value are the same across
10

Figure 3: Establishment with recurrent migration. (A) Expected time until a population is established
in the novel habitat for increasing rates of migration and different degrees of maladaptation (z̄s , the
mean trait value in the source population). Results are shown for the case with αk = 0 for k = 2, 3, 4.
(B) Proportion of simulation replicates in which tetraploids established. The dots connected by solid
lines show simulation results with αk = 0, whereas the dots connected by dashed lines show simulation
results with α2 = 1/2, α3 = 1/4 and α4 = 1/6 (i.e. maximum α). The solid horizontal lines mark
p4 π 4
(p4 π4 +p2 π2 ) , where p2 and p4 are the establishment probabilities for a single diploid and a single tetraploid
individual in the absence of migration (as in fig. 2, but with unreduced gamete formation included). The
dashed horizontal line marks the proportion of tetraploid migrants (i.e. the proportion of tetraploids at
equilibrium in the source population, ≈ 0.3%). The baseline predictions (horizontal lines) are based on
5 × 106 simulation replicates. All other results are based on 50.000 replicate simulations. We assume
γ = 0.25 and u = v = 0.05.

these simulations, this is a consequence only of the reduced rate of inbreeding, which slows
down the exhaustion of the genetic variance carried by the initial migrant individual.
While the probability of establishment becomes lower as the strength of selection
becomes large, the establishment probability does not decrease monotonically with γ,
i.e. as selection becomes very weak, the establishment probability also decreases. This
happens because, although the probability of surviving the first couple of generations
becomes higher when selection is weaker, adaptation (i.e. increase in the trait mean)
will be slower, increasing the risk that genetic variation is exhausted due to inbreeding
before the population is able to reach a consistently positive growth rate. Note that
when γ = 0, each individual has fitness 1 and we have a critical branching process with a
Poisson offspring distribution, so that the probability to reach N = 100 is 1/100 (Barton
and Etheridge, 2018).
Evidently, the scaling of the genetic variance across ploidy levels has a profound effect
on the establishment probability, but only when β4 is close to 0.5 (i.e. individual alleles
have almost half the effect size in tetraploids compared to diploids) is the benefit of the
slower rate of inbreeding in tetraploids canceled (fig. 2B,C).

Establishment under recurrent migration
We next consider establishment in the new habitat when there is a continuous influx
of migrants (m migrants per generation on average) coming from a large, noninbred
and predominantly diploid source population at cytotype equilibrium. In this setting,
establishment is certain to happen eventually, and we are interested in the probability
that a tetraploid population establishes before a diploid one does. More specifically, we
are interested in how maladaptive gene flow and MCE (which both increase with m)
affect the relative establishment probability and the time until establishment.
11

Figure 4: Evolution of the mean inbreeding coefficient and trait value across establishment replicates,
averaged by population size, for increasing rates of migration (m) from the predominantly diploid source
population. All results are based on 1000 succesful establishment replicates. We assume equal equilibrium
variance across ploidy levels and γ = 0.25, θ = 2, 2V = 1 and u = v = 0.05. The m = 0 simulations are
seeded with a single diploid or tetraploid individual with trait value 0, and assume u = v = 0.

We hypothesized that two counteracting processes affect the probability of autotetraploid establishment in this scenario. On the one hand, increased migration will increase the probability that an otherwise likely successful tetraploid migrant suffers from
MCE in the early generations while the population size is low, because migrants are likely
to be diploid. On the other hand, tetraploids are more strongly reproductively isolated
from a typical migrant, so that a tetraploid subpopulation should be less prone to maladaptive gene flow. Hence, conditional on evading MCE, they should be able to adapt
to the new habitat at a rate which is not strongly affected by the migration rate. This
contrasts with diploids, which interbreed freely with maladapted migrants, resulting in a
pulling back of the trait mean towards that of the source population. However, MCE is
expected to be stronger than the latter effect, precluding the establishment of tetraploids
as m increases. Lastly, as the mean trait value on the island increases in diploids during
adaptation, newly formed tetraploids on the island will, on average, have more extreme
phenotypes than diploid offspring when β4 > 1/2, which may also aid their establishment
(irrespective of m).
As expected, we find that the time to establishment (of a population of either ploidy
level) first decreases with increasing migration as a result of a larger influx of potentially
succesful migrants, but later increases with increasing migration as a result of swamping
by gene flow (fig. 3A). Importantly, the tetraploid establishment probability is considerably larger than the expected proportion of tetraploid migrants over a large part of
the parameter range (fig. 3B, black dashed line). Furthermore, we find that for small
migration rates, the probability that tetraploids establish rather than diploids can be
larger than expected based on the establishment probabilities in the absence of migration
(colored lines in fig. 3), depending on how maladapted migrant individuals are. This
suggests that maladaptive gene flow in diploids can increase the probability of tetraploid
establishment. However, at the same time we find that the tetraploid establishment
probability declines monotonically with m, which highlights the negative effects of MCE.
Together, these results confirm the view that, while cytotype differences are an effective
barrier to maladaptive gene flow, this advantage to establishment is outweighed by the

12

negative effects of MCE.
Our simulations further show that the mechanism of unreduced gamete formation (as
determined by the α2 parameter) can affect the establishment probability (fig. 3B, dashed
lines). This is mainly because the phenotypic variance of a newly formed tetraploid is
increased by a factor (1+α2 ), thereby increasing the chance that a newly formed tetraploid
is well-adapted to the marginal habitat.
Established diploid populations are more inbred on average than established tetraploids
when migration is weak, but the difference is slight except when there is no migration
at all (fig. 4, top row). For stronger migration (m > 0.1), the opposite holds. This is a
result of two interacting processes. On the one hand, inbreeding is slower in tetraploids,
so that during adaptation and establishment from a single or limited number of barely
inbred individuals, the inbreeding coefficient is expected to increase less rapidly conditional on the event of tetraploid establishment. On the other hand, migration mostly
introduces unrelated diploids, which cross more readily with diploids than tetraploids, so
that migration reduces the average relatedness in established diploid populations much
more than in established tetraploid populations.
Conditional on establishment, tetraploids have a higher trait mean both in the absence of migration and for moderate to strong migration, but not when migration is
weak (fig. 4, bottom row). In the absence of migration, this is a consequence of the
reduced rate of inbreeding and the resulting increased adaptive potential of tetraploids.
Another consequence of this is that, in the absence of migration, the average trait value
in tetraploids at low population size (conditional on eventual establishment) is lower than
that in diploids. This is because, in order to adapt before genetic variation is exhausted,
tetraploids need not increase the trait mean as much as diploids do in the first couple of
generation.
It is clear from fig. 4 that migration is not only maladaptive, but also introduces
genetic variation upon which selection can act, thereby increasing the mean trait value at
the time of establishment for both tetraploids and diploids. Interestingly, when migration
is strong, tetraploids have markedly larger phenotypic values than diploids (m = 1 in
fig. 4). Diploids suffer strongly from maladaptive gene flow when the population size is
low, while tetraploids enjoy some reproductive isolation. Furthermore, in these replicates,
tetraploids tend to emerge and rise in frequency at larger population sizes on the island,
and hence tend to derive from diploids that already experienced several generations of
selection. Neotetraploids deriving from parents with z > 0 will have more extreme
phenotypes on average (see methods) and hence be better adapted.

Loss of self-incompatibility and assortative mating
We now briefly examine the effects of prezygotic isolation mechanisms that may be associated with polyploidization and that could alleviate MCE. Plausible sources of prezygotic
isolation include assortative mating by cytotype and self-fertilization.
When polyploidization disrupts an existing SI system (see e.g. Robertson et al. (2011);
Zenil-Ferguson et al. (2019); Novikova et al. (2023)), we expect that tetraploids suffer less
from MCE, as an appreciable portion of their ovules are now assured to be fertilized by
diploid gametes, irrespective of the composition of the population. At the same time, we
expect that accelerated inbreeding in selfing tetraploids diminishes the adaptive advantage
of tetraploids that we found above. As shown in fig. 5, we find that when polyploidization
is associated with the loss of a SI system (i.e. when diploids are self-incompatible, but
13

Figure 5: (A) Establishment with recurrent migration selfing in polyploids. The solid lines show the
case where diploids are self-incompatible The dashed transparent lines show the case where diploids do
random self-fertilization (i.e. self-fertilization occurs with probability 1/N ), Triploids and tetraploids
have the same selfing rate. σ = 0.0 refers to random self-fertilization. (B) Establishment with recurrent
migration and assortative mating by cytotype. The rate of assortative mating is determined by ρk = ρ
for k = 2, 3, 4, where ρk is the probability that an ovule from a k-ploid mother is pollinated by a kploid father. All results are based on 25.000 replicate simulations. We assume γ = 0.25, θ = 1.5 and
u = v = 0.05.

tetraploids are not), tetraploids have a strongly increases establishment probability. This
is the case even when the selfing rate σ in tetraploids is zero (in which case, under
our modeling assumptions, there is only random selfing, i.e. the realized selfing rate in
tetraploids is 1/N ).
Besides reducing MCE, selfing is also expected to simultaneously reduce the effects of
maladaptive gene flow, so we would expect that tetraploid establishment is promoted with
increasing migration rates. However, increased migration would at the same time alleviate
the issue of reproductive assurance in diploids, as a diploid migrant is more likely to find a
compatible mate. We find that when the selfing rate is sufficiently high (≥ 0.4 in fig. 5A),
the relative establishment probability of tetraploids increases with increasing migration
rate. In this regime, the increased strength of MCE due to increased migration and
increased reproductive assurance in diploids is compensated by the stronger maladaptive
gene flow experienced by diploids.
Self-incompatibility is clearly a strong disadvantage when colonizing a novel habitat,
as a self-incompatible population of size one can never reproduce. However, even when
diploids are self-compatible, polyploids may still have increased rates of self-fertilization
(for instance due to altered flower morphology). As an illustration, fig. 5A also shows
results where diploids are assumed to be self-compatible with σ = 0 in diploids (i.e.
random selfing, dashed transparent lines). The tetraploid establishment probability is
still markedly increased when σ ≥ 0.4, and as for the simulations with self-incompatibility,
migration still promotes the probability of tetraploid establishment when the selfing rate
in polyploids is sufficiently large.
Another prezygotic isolating mechanism that has often been considered relevant for
explaining tetraploid establishment is assortative mating by ploidy level, where ovules
from a tetraploid are more likely to be fertilized by pollen coming from a tetraploid –
irrespective of the trait values of these individuals. Clearly, assortative mating increases
the probability of tetraploid establishment (fig. 5B), although not as strongly as the
loss of an SI system does. Again, we find that for some parameter values (roughly
ρ ≥ 0.4), assortative mating may be strong enough so that tetraploid establishment
14

increases with increasing migration rates, suggesting that tetraploids evade maladapive
gene flow sufficiently to overcome MCE.

Discussion
The observation that polyploid populations tend to inhabit more extreme habitats or
occur at the edge of the range of their conspecific diploids has spurred considerable
interest among botanists and evolutionary biologists (Rice et al., 2015; Kolář et al.,
2017; Van de Peer et al., 2021; Griswold, 2021; Mortier et al., 2024). An important
question is whether such patterns emerge because polyploids are somehow more tolerant
to extreme environmental conditions (i.e. they somehow are intrinsically more fit than
diploids at the range margin), or whether other aspects of the population dynamics of
mixed-ploidy populations may favor the establishment of polyploid subpopulations in
peripheral habitats.
In this study, we worked out the infinitesimal model for an additive polygenic trait
in autotetraploids and mixed-ploidy populations. We used the mixed-ploidy infinitesimal model to study the establishment of tetraploids in a marginal habitat by means of
individual-based simulations. Assuming the trait to be under directional selection in the
marginal habitat, and migration of maladapted individuals from a predominantly diploid
source, we sought to determine the conditions under which tetraploids are more likely
to establish a stable population. Importantly, we assume no intrinsic advantage of polyploids in the marginal habitat, i.e. the expected fitness of a migrant individual is the
same regardless of the ploidy level. Differences in establishment probabilities are hence
caused solely by aspects of autopolyploid genetics and the barrier to gene flow between
subpopulations of different ploidy levels.
When migration is weak, succesful establishment is not affected by maladaptive gene
flow and we can treat establishment in the marginal habitat as independent trials of
founding a population from a single individual. In order to avoid extinction, the population has to increase the trait mean by a sufficient amount before the genetic variation
carried by the initial migrant individual is exhausted. The probability that the population
manages to do so depends on the degree of maladaptation, the intensity of selection and
the rate of inbreeding. We find that the decreased rate of inbreeding in autotetraploids
gives a rare tetraploid migrant a larger adaptive potential than a diploid migrant, even
if the genetic variance carried by the founding individual is the same.
In the presence of maladaptive gene flow, a nascent tetraploid subpopulation suffers
from MCE, and although polyploids are more reproductively isolated from a typical
migrant (and hence suffer less maladaptive gene flow), MCE will preclude polyploid
establishment as the rate of migration grows. Nevertheless, it is important to remark
that, the probability of tetraploid establishment in the marginal habitat can be an order
of magnitude higher than expected based on the frequency of tetraploid migrants (i.e. is
roughly O(u) instead of O(u2 )) when migration is sufficiently weak and maladaptation
sufficiently high.
Additional sources of prezygotic isolation such as selfing and assortative mating by
cytotype may further boost the probability of tetraploid establishment. These processes
interact with the rate of migration, so that when selfing/assortative mating occurs above
some threshold rate, the tetraploid establishment probability increases with increasing
migration rates, whereas below the threshold it decreases with increasing migration pres-

15

sure. In the latter case, the advantage that tetraploids have when it comes to avoiding
maladaptive gene flow is not strong enough to overcome the effects of MCE, whereas in
the former case it is.
A major weakness of the present work is that we have ignored inbreeding depression and dominance throughout. Including dominance in the infinitesimal framework
is already challenging for diploids (requiring the tracking of 4-way identity coefficients;
Barton et al. (2023)), and appears intractable for higher ploidy levels. Nevertheless, autopolyploidy has important consequences whenever dominance is relevant, as in the case
of inbreeding depression. Indeed, when inbreeding depression is due to recessive deleterious variation, it should be less expressed in polyploids simply because, for the same
allele frequency, homozygous genotypes are much rarer in polyploids than in diploids at
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. When there is indeed deleterious recessive variation, inbreeding during the establishment process should therefore incur a higher fitness cost in
diploids relative to tetraploids, and hence further increase the probability of tetraploid
establishment. In addition, inbreeding itself occurs at a slower rate in polyploids, further
decreasing inbreeding depression during establishment.
Griswold (2021) performed a study somewhat similar to ours, but did include inbreeding depression. In that work, the author focused on the case where local fitness is
determined by a single biallelic locus, and investigated the interaction between inbreeding
depression and migration load (where inbreeding depression is modeled as an immediate
fitness reduction in offspring produced by selfing). In his model, inbreeding depression
is different between cytotypes, so that tetraploids are able to produce more offspring
through selfing relative to diploids, who have to rely more on outcrossing. However, outcrossing incurs maladaptive gene flow, and thereby puts the diploids at a disadvantage.
The author found that autotetraploids can establish when adaptation in the peripheral
habitat is conferred by recessive alleles (so that migration load is expressed when migrant
alleles are rare) and when inbreeding depression in tetraploids is lower than in diploids.
Note that, at the same time, polyploids are expected to accumulate a larger mutation
load when deleterious variation is recessive due to less efficient purging, and this may
yield increased inbreeding depression. These effects have been studied in the context of
range expansions (Booker and Schrider, 2024). However, this applies only to polyploids
that have been established for a long time. In our case, polyploids are always recently
descended from diploid ancestors, so they will not have accumulated more deleterious
recessives than their diploid counterparts, in which case polyploidy would lead to reduced
rather than increased inbreeding depression (as discussed above).

Acknowledgements
I thank Christelle Fraı̈sse for employment, encouragement and feedback. I acknowledge
funding from the Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO, Junior Postdoctoral Fellowship
1272625N).

References
B. Arnold, K. Bomblies, and J. Wakeley. Extending coalescent theory to autotetraploids.
Genetics, 192(1):195–204, 2012.

16

E. Baack. To succeed globally, disperse locally: effects of local pollen and seed dispersal
on tetraploid establishment. Heredity, 94(5):538–546, 2005.
N. H. Barton and A. Etheridge. Establishment in a new habitat by polygenic adaptation.
Theoretical Population Biology, 122:110–127, 2018.
N. H. Barton, A. M. Etheridge, and A. Véber. The infinitesimal model: Definition,
derivation, and implications. Theoretical population biology, 118:50–73, 2017.
N. H. Barton, A. M. Etheridge, and A. Véber. The infinitesimal model with dominance.
Genetics, 225(2):iyad133, 2023.
J. Bezanson, A. Edelman, S. Karpinski, and V. B. Shah. Julia: A fresh approach to
numerical computing. SIAM review, 59(1):65–98, 2017.
W. W. Booker and D. R. Schrider. The genetic consequences of range expansion and its
influence on diploidization in polyploids. The American Naturalist, 0(ja):null, 2024.
doi: 10.1086/733334. URL https://doi.org/10.1086/733334.
F. Bretagnolle and J. D. Thompson. Gametes with the somatic chromosome number:
mechanisms of their formation and role in the evolution of autopolyploid plants. New
Phytologist, 129(1):1–22, 1995.
M. R. Brown, R. J. Abbott, and A. D. Twyford. The emerging importance of cross-ploidy
hybridisation and introgression. Molecular Ecology, 33(8):e17315, 2024.
J. Clo. The evolution of the additive variance of a trait under stabilizing selection after
autopolyploidization. Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 35(6):891–897, 2022a.
J. Clo. Polyploidization: Consequences of genome doubling on the evolutionary potential
of populations. American Journal of Botany, 109(8):1213–1220, 2022b.
J. Clo, N. Padilla-Garcı́a, and F. Kolář. Polyploidization as an opportunistic mutation:
The role of unreduced gametes formation and genetic drift in polyploid establishment.
Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 35(8):1099–1109, 2022.
N. De Storme and D. Geelen. Sexual polyploidization in plants–cytological mechanisms
and molecular regulation. New Phytologist, 198(3):670–684, 2013.
F. Felber. Establishment of a tetraploid cytotype in a diploid population: effect of relative
fitness of the cytotypes. Journal of evolutionary biology, 4(2):195–207, 1991.
F. Felber and J. D. Bever. Effect of triploid fitness on the coexistence of diploids and
tetraploids. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 60(1):95–106, 1997.
C. K. Griswold. The effects of migration load, selfing, inbreeding depression, and the
genetics of adaptation on autotetraploid versus diploid establishment in peripheral
habitats. Evolution, 75(1):39–55, 2021.
L. K. Hayward and G. Sella. Polygenic adaptation after a sudden change in environment.
Elife, 11:e66697, 2022.

17

T. Herben, P. Trávniček, and J. Chrtek. Reduced and unreduced gametes combine
almost freely in a multiploidy system. Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution and
Systematics, 18:15–22, 2016.
F. Kauai, Q. Bafort, F. Mortier, M. Van Montagu, D. Bonte, and Y. Van de Peer.
Interspecific transfer of genetic information through polyploid bridges. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 121(21):e2400018121, 2024.
T. J. Kawecki. Adaptation to marginal habitats. Annual review of ecology, evolution,
and systematics, 39(1):321–342, 2008.
C. Köhler, O. M. Scheid, and A. Erilova. The impact of the triploid block on the origin
and evolution of polyploid plants. Trends in Genetics, 26(3):142–148, 2010.
F. Kolář, M. Čertner, J. Suda, P. Schönswetter, and B. C. Husband. Mixed-ploidy
species: progress and opportunities in polyploid research. Trends in plant science, 22
(12):1041–1055, 2017.
J. M. Kreiner, P. Kron, and B. C. Husband. Frequency and maintenance of unreduced
gametes in natural plant populations: associations with reproductive mode, life history
and genome size. New Phytologist, 214(2):879–889, 2017a.
J. M. Kreiner, P. Kron, and B. C. Husband. Evolutionary dynamics of unreduced gametes.
Trends in Genetics, 33(9):583–593, 2017b.
R. Lande. The fixation of chromosomal rearrangements in a subdivided population with
local extinction and colonization. Heredity, 54(3):323–332, 1985.
D. A. Levin. Minority cytotype exclusion in local plant populations. Taxon, 24(1):35–43,
1975.
D. A. Levin. The role of chromosomal change in plant evolution. Oxford University Press,
USA, 2002.
M. Lynch and B. Walsh. Genetics and analysis of quantitative traits, volume 1. Sinauer
Sunderland, MA, 1998.
M. E. Moody, L. Mueller, and D. Soltis. Genetic variation and random drift in autotetraploid populations. Genetics, 134(2):649–657, 1993.
F. Mortier, Q. Bafort, S. Milosavljevic, F. Kauai, L. Prost Boxoen, Y. Van de Peer, and
D. Bonte. Understanding polyploid establishment: temporary persistence or stable
coexistence? Oikos, page e09929, 2024.
P. Y. Novikova, U. K. Kolesnikova, and A. D. Scott. Ancestral self-compatibility facilitates
the establishment of allopolyploids in brassicaceae. Plant Reproduction, 36(1):125–138,
2023.
B. P. Oswald and S. L. Nuismer. A unified model of autopolyploid establishment and
evolution. The American Naturalist, 178(6):687–700, 2011.
J. Ramsey and D. W. Schemske. Pathways, mechanisms, and rates of polyploid formation
in flowering plants. Annual review of ecology and systematics, 29(1):467–501, 1998.
18

J. H. Rausch and M. T. Morgan. The effect of self-fertilization, inbreeding depression,
and population size on autopolyploid establishmen. Evolution, 59(9):1867–1875, 2005.
A. Rice, L. Glick, S. Abadi, M. Einhorn, N. M. Kopelman, A. Salman-Minkov, J. Mayzel,
O. Chay, and I. Mayrose. The chromosome counts database (ccdb)–a community
resource of plant chromosome numbers. New Phytologist, 206(1):19–26, 2015.
K. Robertson, E. E. Goldberg, and B. Igić. Comparative evidence for the correlated
evolution of polyploidy and self-compatibility in solanaceae. Evolution, 65(1):139–155,
2011.
J. Ronfort. The mutation load under tetrasomic inheritance and its consequences for the
evolution of the selfing rate in autotetraploid species. Genetics Research, 74(1):31–42,
1999.
D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, D. W. Schemske, J. F. Hancock, J. N. Thompson, B. C. Husband,
and W. S. Judd. Autopolyploidy in angiosperms: have we grossly underestimated the
number of species? Taxon, 56(1):13–30, 2007.
M. Stift, C. Berenos, P. Kuperus, and P. H. van Tienderen. Segregation models for
disomic, tetrasomic and intermediate inheritance in tetraploids: a general procedure
applied to rorippa (yellow cress) microsatellite data. Genetics, 179(4):2113–2123, 2008.
M. Turelli. Commentary: Fisher’s infinitesimal model: A story for the ages. Theoretical
population biology, 118:46–49, 2017.
Y. Van de Peer, T.-L. Ashman, P. S. Soltis, and D. E. Soltis. Polyploidy: an evolutionary
and ecological force in stressful times. The Plant Cell, 33(1):11–26, 2021.
R. Zenil-Ferguson, J. G. Burleigh, W. A. Freyman, B. Igić, I. Mayrose, and E. E. Goldberg. Interaction among ploidy, breeding system and lineage diversification. New
Phytologist, 224(3):1252–1265, 2019.

19


